# Synopsis

![Example Figure.(Ram 2018)`\label{fig:multi}`{=tex}](multi-example.png)

Figures play a central role in the life cycle of all kinds of research
and analysis. That is: *The communication of results*.

Often, those results require complex figures as the one shown in Figure 1.  This
example shows a figure that is composed of two sub figures. Each one with its
own caption and a larger caption for the total figure. That last caption has
references to the sub figures.

The above figure is generated by the following LaTeX code:

``` {.tex}
\begin{figure}[!htbp]
    \centering
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.5\textwidth}
        %\includegraphics[width=7.5cm, height=5.5cm]{Indian_foils_H20.pdf}
        \includegraphics[width=7.5cm, height=5.5cm]{figures/GEM/figures/Fig_11(a).pdf}
        \caption{ }
        \label{fig:Indian_foils_H20}
    \end{subfigure}
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.46\textwidth}
        %\includegraphics[width=7.5cm, height=5.5cm]{CERN_foils.pdf} 
        \includegraphics[width=7.5cm, height=5.5cm]{figures/GEM/figures/Fig_11(b).pdf} 
        \caption{ }
        \label{fig:CERN_foils}
    \end{subfigure}
   \caption{Leakage Current of (a) Micropack Foils and (b) CERN Foils, at an
   average temperature of T=27$^{\circ}$C and relative humidity equal to 20\%.}
   \label{fig:L_01}
\end{figure}
```

What we propose in this project is to **enhance `pandoc`'s figure
handling capabilities** to represent similar figures, captions and
references. This will enable `pandoc` to, for example, convert the
previous code to HTML among other formats.

Furthermore we propose **using markdown syntax** to represent this
composite figure. This, we hope, will require less boilerplate code than
LaTeX to achieve the same result.

# Benefits to the Community

We believe the community will benefit by:

## Having a concise syntax for complex figures

`Pandoc` is an integral part of R Markdown used by many scientists. It
is also being used for the production of academic journals, e.g.Â JOSS,
kommunikation@gesellschaft.

This project would provide those users with a more concise way to
communicate their results using multiple figures.

## Facilitating single source publishing

In [single source
publishing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-source_publishing), one
single document is used to create different forms of media (*e.g*: pdf,
html).

The implementation of this project would mean that content creators will
have to revert to LaTeX (or other markup) less often. Making their
source document more readable and consistent.

# Project description

## Brief introduction to pandoc

`Pandoc` is a Haskell library for converting from one markup format to
another, and a command-line tool that uses this library.

`Pandoc` can convert between numerous markup and word processing
formats, including, but not limited to, various flavors of Markdown,
HTML, LaTeX and Word docx.

`Pandoc`'s enhanced version of Markdown includes syntax for tables,
definition lists, metadata blocks, footnotes, citations, math, and much
more.

![`Pandoc`'s conversion logic`\label{fig:native-rep}`{=tex}](pandoc.svg)

`Pandoc` has a modular design: it consists of a set of readers, which
parse text in a given format and produce a native representation of the
document (an abstract syntax tree or AST), and a set of writers, which
convert this native representation into a target format (Figure
2). Thus, adding an input or output format
requires only adding a reader or writer. Users can also run custom
`pandoc` filters to modify the intermediate AST.(MacFarlane 2021)

## Goals

The objective of this project is to augment `pandoc`'s figure handling
capabilities by:

-   **Providing explicit handling**: `pandoc`'s currently represents
    figures as an image in its own paragraph(@jgm 2016). This has been
    sufficient for basic figure handling but more detailed figure
    manipulation will probably require a new constructor in the native
    representation.

-   **Implementing more functionality**: In particular: multiple figure
    arrangement, labeling and referencing.

-   **Expose the new functionality to the Lua filters**: This will
    enable end users to add figure support to formats that don't support
    them natively, like Markdown.

## Methodology

The way we propose to enhance `pandoc`'s figure handling capabilities is
to start by extending the *native representation* to better describe
figures. This is something the current version does but only in a
limited fashion (@jgm 2016).

To that end, we'll research and design a way to leverage markdown syntax
to describe, for example, a figure composed of various smaller figures.

Once that design is done and test cases have been produced, we'll start
implementing the extension in the native representation and extending
the *readers* and *writers* to make use of it. We intend this to be an
iterative process from designing the constructor to its use in the
*writer* going back and forth as we extend the capabilities.

We plan to use Haskell's extension `PatternSynonyms` to decouple the
data structure that stores the figure information from how it is
consumed and produced by the *writers* and *readers* respectively. (GHC
2021)

In the final phase of the project we want to expose the new
functionality to `pandoc`'s Lua interface so that users can, for
example, write custom combined figures output for a particular format.

## Project timeline.`\label{sec:timeline}`{=tex}

These are the planned stages to complete the project. Figure
3 shows the allocated time per activity. The
activities are detailed next.

![Project's Gannt diagram`\label{fig:gannt}`{=tex}](gannt.png)

### Requirement gathering and prioritization.

This is deciding in a hierarchy of features that we would like to
implement first(composition, labeling, referencing). Always in the
context of enhancing the figure handling capabilities of `pancoc`.

### Deciding on a syntax for markdown documents and creating test cases.

Once the first priorities have been defined we'll devise a way to use
markdown syntax to represent the enhanced figure capabilities. Like:
Composing figures. For this we'll take inspiration from HTML and LaTex.

Only existing Markdown constructs will be used at first: this way, we'll
be able to use filters to create a figure without having to modify the
Markdown parser.

This also includes deciding on `pandoc`'s output for HTML and LaTeX.

**Deliverables**: the markdown syntax, the tests, the output.

### Add a constructor to the native representation that represents figures. {#sec:new-constructor}

Based on the syntax and the feature. This is the time to design the data
structure that will hold the information needed. This structure has to
play along well with the ones already defined in `pandoc`'s internal
data representation.

This also takes into account other formats for inspiration. HTML, LaTeX,
etc... As well as previous work (@despresc 2020a).

This is an internal **deliverable** since, once created, the structure
can be used in the future in *Readers* and writers.

### Modify the *Readers* to use that constructor

Once the destination data structure has been decided, we'll have to
extract the information from the source file and store it in it.

Haskell's `PatternSynonyms`, to a certain extent, allow us to decouple
this process of extraction from the native representation.

This is an internal **deliverable** since, once created by the *Reader*,
the result in the internal representation can be used by *Writers*
written in the future.

### Modify the *Writers* (`html`, `LaTeX`) to use that constructor.

This means to transform the native presentation to a target output
format.

Again we hope Haskell's `PatternSynonyms` will permit, to a certain
extent, to decouple this transformation from the source data structure.

This is an internal **deliverable** as this can consume the internal
representation provided by other *Writers*. The output of the *writers*
is what ultimately produces the functionality observed by the end users.

### Iterate the design until the results are deemed satisfactory.

We propose implementing the features iteratively adding them in the
order as they were deemed important in the first phase.

### Expose functionality to the Lua filters.

With this, end users could add figure support to formats that don't
support them natively, like Markdown.

This will require researching the filter's implementation and usage to
decide the best way to expose the functionality.

### Write Documentation

Write documentation of the implemented features that are exposed to end
users.

## Detailed Deliverables

As detailed in the previous section:

-   A new constructor in the `Block` type(the native representation) to
    represent a figure.
-   A new markdown syntax extension to represent more complex figures in
    `pandoc`.
-   New versions of the HTML and markdown readers that produce the new
    constructor.
-   New versions of the HTML and `LaTeX` writers that use the new
    constructor.
-   `Lua` bindings for the new functionality.
-   Documentation of the features.

# Related Work

There have been proposals for this constructor before (@despresc 2020a)
which are considered in the implementation of this project. Together
with `pandoc`'s native representation of tables (@despresc 2020b).

# About me

## With respect to pandoc and this project

I've already worked with `pandoc`'s code base. I've also used `pandoc`
to generate documents in both work and academic situations.

### Adding support for figures in the asciiDoc format.

In this [pull request](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/pull/6671).

-   I added support for figures in the `asciiDoc` format by modifying
    the relevant *writer*.

-   Updated the relevant tests for the new functionality.

This was marked as a *Good first issue* on GitHub and was how I became
familiar with `pandoc`'s code base and basic architecture.

### Changing the default style for markdown headings

In these pull requests \[[1](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/pull/6693),
[2](https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/pull/6837)\]. I changed the default
markdown headings format from `Setext`:

    Setext Heading Style
    ====================

to `atx`

    # ATX Heading Style

As markdown is involved in various other formats, like `iPyhon`,
literate Haskell, etc..., this involved work in various *readers* and
*writers* as well as changing many test cases.

## With respect to Haskell

I wrote my solutions to the Advent of code 2020 edition
[code](https://github.com/argent0/adventOfCode2020/) using Haskell. I
like Haskell and Functional Programming.

## Contact Information

Redacted

## Professional

-   Github: https://github.com/argent0
-   Linkedin: https://www.linkedin.com/in/aner-lucero-3778bb42/

## Skills

-   Languages: Haskell, R, Python, Perl, Bash, Awk, C, C++, Java.

## Education

Master's degree in Physics: At Instituto Balseiro, Universidad Nacional
de Cuyo. Thesis title: "CaracterizaciÃ³n del mapeo entrada salida en
Neuronas Individuales." Directed by: Dr.Â InÃ©s Samengo. From 2006 to 2007

Bachelor's degree in Physics: At Instituto Balseiro, Universidad
Nacional de Cuyo. Thesis title: "CaracterizaciÃ³n del mapeo entrada
salida en Neuronas Individuales." Directed by: Dr.Â InÃ©s Samengo. This
work was continued in the master's degree. From 2004 to 2006

Enrolled in the Bachelor's degree of computer science at Universidad
Nacional de Cuyo since 2019,

# Bibliography

@despresc\. 2020a. <https://github.com/jgm/pandoc-types/pull/83>.

---------. 2020b. <https://github.com/jgm/pandoc-types/pull/66>.

GHC, Team. 2021. "Pattern Synonyms."
<https://ghc.gitlab.haskell.org/ghc/doc/users_guide/exts/pattern_synonyms.html>.

@jgm\. 2016. "Explicit Figure Element in Block."
<https://github.com/jgm/pandoc/issues/3177>.

MacFarlane, John et al. 2021. *Pandoc User's Guide*.

Ram, Krishna Sharma. 2018. "Latex Commands."
<https://ram1123.github.io/latex/2018/05/25/Latex-Tutorial.html>.
